>> Spencer Schneidenbach: All right so
we've covered a lot of ground today.
We've covered classes,
see a lot of the C sharp basic features.
We talked about LINQ and collections.
I wanna talk about some of the advanced
kind of the more kind of rubber meets
the road stuff that you'll
see up to this point.
We've really focused on
the language itself and
the capabilities of the language.
I wanna talk about some of the deeper
capabilities as it relates
to actually doing stuff in the real world.
So first, I do wanna mention that
I provide a lot of examples for
all of the LINQ stuff that I just covered.
Each of these even selects and
where's they all take.
They all have an individual
page where they kinda go over.
Some of the more nuanced things we
covered, a lot of the good stuff,
which was good, but
now let's go into what I would consider
to be kinda as I mentioned,
the rubber meets the road stuff.
So I said in my opening
monologue that programming is so
much more than just the ecosystem is so
much more than the language.
It's the ecosystem that you operate in.
And luckily for us .NET and Microsoft
have been very intentional about giving
us a really batteries included framework
from which we can build applications.
So I wanna talk about some
of the more advanced
programming topics as it relates to.
Some asynchronous programming or
reading files from streams.
So we're gonna talk about some
of these libraries today.
Collections is one that
we've just gone through.
We went through LINQ, and I've showed you
90% of what you need to know in the for
operating on collections
in the real world.
We're gonna also talk about reading
from and writing to files and
things that are streams, called streams.
We'll talk about writing to and from JSON,
which is the kind of communication
format of the web, the de facto
one that's kind of taken over.
We'll talk about making HTTP requests and
how .NET does that.
We've talked about LINQ already.
We'll talk about the asynchronous
programming model,
which is highly important.
And finally, we will talk
a little bit about reflection,
which is a fairly advanced topic, but one
that I think is important to know exists.
So without any further ado, let's talk
first about asynchronous programming.
So asynchronous programming is really this
idea that this idea that there are some
operations that you will do that will
naturally just be bound by other things,
right?
So think of a when you
open your web browser and
you go to Facebook or
you go to Twitter or Google.
And you go to that website, and
you sit and wait for it to load.
A lot of things are happening
in the background,
that there was that information, that
web page is being loaded asynchronously.
We have to reach out to the server, we
have to connect to the server, we have to
download that stream of bytes, and then
we have to render it inside the browser.
Asynchronous Programming
enables responsive and
scalable applications,
specifically in really all walks of life.
When we do our ASP.NET Core course,
we will focus specifically on how
it helps in a web environment.
But just imagine if you had a browser and
you opened it up and when you went to
a website, your whole browser froze
until that website was finished loading.
I think most people would
stop using that browser.
And asynchronous programming kind of
allows you to have a lot of those things
that will allow you to keep that
screen from freezing, right?
It will help you from
prevent resource exhaustion.
I hope you do all of those things while
providing a really nice experience for
your user or like I said,
not exhausting your servers.
So this is the general syntax.
So there's a couple of things
that we need to talk about.
So the keywords that you need to know are
called async, and they're called await.
Okay so what does that mean?
What are those things and
what the heck is task?
Well, I think the best thing is to
actually show it in
a real kind of scenario.
A task is kind of like,
if you're familiar with JavaScript,
a task is essentially a promise.
It's basically saying that this is
something that's happening that
will eventually be done, right?
A task is a, an object that has
properties to say, is it started,
Is it finished, is it exceptioned AKA,
did it encounter an exception?
And so it in and of itself can
be it can do one of two things.
A task can return a value, or
it can just do something kind of like
an action method, a void returning method.
There are 2 types of tasks.
When we're talking about making
HTTP requests specifically.
All of the libraries that we use,
that are common to use all
download requests asynchronously.
There is no way to just download
a request synchronously.
So imagine if you were
doing this in win forms.
In win forms, if you click
the button to download something and
you weren't asynchronous,
your whole application would freeze up
while it was completing that request.
Whereas asynchronous programming
gives a language integrated way to
kind of give you that give you a way
to program asynchronously, but
not really no need to know in a deep way,
what's going on under the hood.
It is useful to know, but
you don't have to create and
write all those constructs yourself.
You don't have to do it all yourself,
you don't have to do all the wiring
yourself it just sort of happens.
So I wanna kind of point out two things.
I wanna point out this async keyword.
The async keyword declares a function
as being asynchronous, and
that means that it can call and
wait on other asynchronous methods.
And an asynchronous method in the context
of the .NET core libraries is going to be
a method that returns some aspect of task.
Now task you see,
has this little thing next to it, and
you hover over it says awaitable.
That means you can wait on
the response of that request.
And what's happening under the hood
is essentially Microsoft is in or
.NET is saying, hey,
this thing is waiting.
I'm gonna free up
the resources on this thread.
And once that promise returns, once that
thread or once that task finishes, I can
resume that thread where I left off and
then complete the rest of the function.
So let's see what that looks like.
The point of this, the real point of this
is that it's meant to be kinda natural and
language integrated in a way
that makes it very easy to do.
So I'm gonna make one change to our void
method, I'm gonna say, or our main method.
I'm gonna say, instead of void,
I'm gonna say async task.
That's essentially our
way of declaring this
main method as being
able to await on things.
So that's a feature that's been around for
the last few versions of .NET is where
you're able to declare
this as async task and
it allows you to do things like data
= await getdata from server async.
I will declare this method as static.
So what are we doing here?
We're calling this method which we could
call without the async without the await
keyword, and
I'll show you what that looks like.
And what we're doing is
we're essentially saying,
I want the string from this task
of string that you've promised me.
This method says that it will
return a task of a string, so
I'm gonna await on that method.
I'm just gonna let you do your thing,
and then once you're done,
you're gonna return to me
the result that is of string.
If I delete this await keyword,
it's gonna complain to
say that you cannot convert from
a task of a string to a string,
because at this point,
we're no longer awaiting on this.
We're just actually trying to get it
like this, where we do task of string,
as opposed to just give me the string
there are some valid reasons to do this.
I think for most programmers and
most .NET developers,
they're probably going to do
something along these lines.
They're probably gonna program
asynchronously like this,
where we actually say,
I want the string and I want to await or
wait for that string to be returned.
So I'm gonna say google.com, and
I'm gonna say Console.WriteLine(data) and
we're gonna see what happens, boom.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Okay,
you see that our console has a bunch
of gobbledygook.
And I'm I assume that, well,
let's see, I see a lot of JavaScript.
I see some embedded images.
I see HTML I think what we've done
is we've gone out to google.com and
returned the entire page and
just spit it out into a string.
And as opposed to rendering it in a
browser, we're just putting it in console.
And I bet you there's that text box
somewhere, the search box as it were,
I don't exactly know what it's named.
Point being is that, we've gone to
google.com using our HttpClient.
We've gotten the contents of that string,
we've returned it to our caller,
and then we've just
printed it to the console.
So this is really powerful
because it's really simple.
Again, I can't emphasize enough
the term language integrated, right?
The async await programming,
this was the kind of a revelation for
programming languages.
The reason that async await exists
in JavaScript, the way that it does,
is largely due to async/await
as it was created in C sharp.
Couple of things to note.
A method that does not return a task or
does not return a value from
a task is simply a task.
And you will not just return anything.
And that's pretty much the same
as a void returning method.
But it's the asynchronous version
of a void returning method,
whereas this is the asynchronous version
of a method that returns a value.
In this case,
it's just returning a string.
If you don't declare this as async,
you can't use this await.
You can't use the await keyword
because a method you can return,
you could just say return
the task directly like that,
which is totally fine as well.
But most of the time, in order to
preserve a nice stack trace, so if you're
getting an exception and you wanna see all
the things that happened in the meantime.
It's best to typically await on
these calls and just return it and
then Just declare it as asynchronous.
And when you get into error handling and
you're looking at exceptions,
that becomes really important.
So some do's and
don'ts of asynchronous programming,
async all the way down
is highly recommended.
If a method calls asynchronous APIs,
it should itself be declared as async.
And if we have an async version of
an API with extremely few exceptions,
and I will tell you the one exception that
I can think of at the ASP.NET Core course,
but you should always use
the asynchronous APIs.
If you're in an asynchronous context,
if you're in an asynchronous method, you
should call the method that Is prefixed or
that is the asynchronous method.
And typically, in .NET it's a standard
that all methods that are async await,
or that are awaitable as we say,
are ended in the word async.
It drives some developers crazy.
For me,
I'd like it because it's very explicit.
So if you see a GetSring method, and
then this GetStringAsync method,
if you're in an asynchronous method,
you should prefer to use GetStringAsync.
I should note that some constructs
in .NET like like HttpClient,
don't even have a GetString
method that is synchronous.
It's async all the way down,
and that's very much by design.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: So, there's
a couple of other things that you should
know about async await or
asynchronous calls.
There is a property on the task itself.
So at this point I've taken out the await
and I'm looking at the task itself.
I'm looking at the properties on the task.
You can see that there's an exception
which can be null if there's not
an exception hasn't been thrown.
There's an ID because all tasks
are assigned an ID by the runtime.
And then there's a couple of weird ones.
There's wait and then there's dot result.
What the heck is this dot result?
That's the result of my asynchronous call.
Well, that should work just fine right?
Should never use .result or .wait, and
the reason why is in that in certain
.net contexts, you can cause deadlocks.
Not to mention that you've kind of
discarded all of the you've essentially
discarded and have converted a
asynchronous method to a synchronous one by
using these, by not using the await
keyword to just get that value out.
So it's really important
that you avoid those.
You don't need to declare every method
as async in your whole application.
And in fact, the compiler will
complain to you that you're doing so
if you're doing so unnecessarily.
You should only declare function is
async if you need it to be asynchronous.
So you should go async all the way down
and favor async APIs where you can.
But if none of the things that, none of
the functions that you're doing require
async, then you shouldn't
declare the method as async.
So a good example of that
would be an add numbers class.
You would not declare or
an AddNumbers method, you wouldn't
declare this as an asynchronous
method because there's no point.
There's no asynchronous operation and
as I mentioned,
if you did,
the compiler will complain at you.
Couple of notes about
declaring async methods.
If you declare this async, it will
complain because it must be of a task that
can be awaitable, or
of a type that can be awaitable.
Int is not awaitable, but
task of int is awaitable because it's a
task that's something that can be awaited.
This would be a huge waste of time and
resources, but
it is technically feasible, but as I
mentioned, the compiler will complain and
tell you that this does not have any
benefit and will run synchronously.
There's one last thing is that you can,
in fact,
declare methods as async void.
This is a compromise done
a long time ago due to
event handlers in .net
all returning being void,
returning methods or
functions that have void.
Do not ever declare a method as async void
unless it's an event handler and really,
and that's if you know what you're doing.
And what I mean by an event handler is
something inside of like a win forms
application.
An event handler would be you click
a button that handles an event handler is
triggered, and that might include
some asynchronous operation.
That is the only use case for async void.
I have seen so
many developers get hung up on async void.
They've declared a method as async void.
They didn't call it async task because
they just wanted to do something.
They just wanted to perform some
kind of asynchronous operation.
Call an API, right?
Just call an API and mutate a target
system, add this person to the payroll
system, and they declared it as async
void, and then wondered why they
were getting these mysterious
runtime errors or runtime problems.
It's because async void is not something
that should be used in most contexts.
And I bring it up because
I've seen it all too often.
Every time somebody writes async void
outside the context of an event handler,
Jon Skeet himself summons tainted
souls into the realm of the living.
That's what happens don't do it.
Lastly, there is a task .run I think
it's actually task .run right here
where you can take a synchronous
method and run it asynchronously.
That's about as useful as doing .result or
.wait and again,
discards some of the usefulness that you
get out of, that kind of throws away
some of the usefulness that you get
out of using, the async await keyword.
This will become very much more relevant
in the ASP.NET Core, course, when we're
looking at real code, because I intend
to show you code that I would write.
And we'll be doing async programming
almost all the way down there.
>> Student 1: Is there anything that's
the equivalent of promise dot all,
from JavaScript?
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Yes so if you
have a series of tasks that you need to
complete and you need to wait till
they're all done, you would do await.
So let's say that this would
be a good use case task1,
this would be a good use case for
bringing your tasks into
a variable like this.
You might download Google twice,
or you might download Twitter.
I guess you'd be downloading Elearn.
Say await Task.WhenAll and that would wait
until where we take wait
until all of these things
are done before it would resume operation.
>> Student 1: And
this is kind of a follow up to that but
are do you have any tips for preventing
race conditions when using async.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Await,
just as long as you're awaiting
if you awaited each of these,
they would run asynchronously per
se in the in a literal sense.
But in a procedural writing code
sense these would then be this one
would run wait till this this would
wait and then task two wouldn't kick off
until task one was complete good question
>> Student 1: And are there any concerns
about exhausting the sockets with async or
HTTP clients in general.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: HTTP client yes,
and
we'll get to that when we get
to the HTTP client section.
That is something that that can happen,
but
only if you use mainly if
you misuse HTTP client.
Otherwise I would not have a problem
from a single HTTP client.
I wouldn't have a problem with running
multiple simultaneous requests.
If I was doing hundreds of them, then
I'd be worried about something else like
bandwidth, but I'd be worried about
some other kind of resource exhaustion,
not necessarily one within the runtime.
Also a really good question.
Of course, we awaited these,
so this Task.WhenAll breaks.